**What Is a Mathematical Optimization Model?**

A "Mathematical Optimization Model" is like a digital twin of your
real-world business situation; it mirrors your actual business landscape
and encapsulates your unique business processes and problems in a
software environment.

Technically speaking, a mathematical optimization model is a
mathematical representation of your real-world business problem that is
made up of three key features:

**• Decision Variables**: The decisions that you have to make.

**• Constraints**: The business rules that you have to follow.

**• Business Objectives**: The various (and often conflicting) business
goals you are aiming to achieve.

![Diagram Description automatically
generated](.//media/image1.png)
To give you an example that is particularly relevant today, a hospital
network which has a business problem such as equipment and facility
capacity planning during the Covid-19 pandemic could create a model that
captures that business problems:

• Decision variables would be like which medical equipment, testing
kits, PPE and ventilators to distribute to which hospitals and which ICU
wards, beds and operating theatres to allocate to which patients.

• Constraints also would be like conventional, contingency and crisis
capacity levels for PPE across the hospital network and regulations
regarding which wards and beds need to be reserved for patients with
various conditions.

• Business objectives would be like maximizing resource utilization and
service-level performance while minimizing operating costs.

This hospital network's model would probably have millions or more
decision variables and constraints, and these inputs could be adjusted
at any time to accommodate the changing conditions of the operating
environment and shifts in supply and demand dynamics.

There are countless other challenging and critical business problems
today, from food production to shipment routing to electric power
generation and transmission to classroom seating assignments (while
respecting social distancing), that can be captured in mathematical
optimization models.

A mathematical optimization model is a dynamic digital representation of
your current business situation, encompassing all the complexity and
volatility that you are facing today.

**How Can a Mathematical Optimization Model Help You Handle
Disruption?**

The act of defining your business problem as a mathematical optimization
model can enable you to attain a greater awareness of your business
conditions and challenges, but how can that model actually be used to
help you deal with disruption? To do this, you need to feed your model
up-to-date data and integrate it with a mathematical optimization solver
that:

• Automatically processes the data and reads the model.

• Combs through and considers an astronomical number of possible
solutions to your business problems.

• Finds the optimal solutions that you can use as the basis to make your
business decisions.

With up-to-date data and a solver, a mathematical optimization model
becomes much more than merely a representation of your business problem;
it becomes an integral part of the solution to that problem.

![](.//media/image2.jpg)Combining these three elements (your
model, your data and a solver) in a mathematical optimization
application gives you the power to:

**• Visualize**: Get a 360-degree, bird's-eye view over your operations
and gain a deep understanding of the dynamics and disruptions present in
your business landscape.

![](.//media/image3.jpeg)**•** **Analyse**: Explore various scenarios and gauge
their potential impact on your business so you can identify risks and
opportunities.

**• Decide**: Rapidly generate optimal solutions to your business
problems and use those solutions to determine the course of action.

By fusing your model with a mathematical optimization solver and
fuelling it with up-to-date data, you get visibility and control over
your operational network. No matter how profoundly the business world
changes, your mathematical optimization application has the flexibility
and robustness to consistently deliver optimal solutions.

**Linear programming:**

In Mathematics, the linear programming method is for optimizing the
operations with some constraints. The main point of linear programming
is to minimize or maximize the numerical value. It also has the linear
functions that are subjected to the constraints in the form of linear
equations or in the form of linear inequalities.

Linear programming is considered an important technique which is used to
find the optimum resource utilization. The terminology "linear
programming" has two words "linear" and "programming". The word "linear"
talks about the relationship between multiple variables with degree one.
The word "programming" on the other hand, talks about the process of
selecting the best solution from different alternatives.

**An example of linear programming**

Suppose a smaller decorating shop has:

300 litres of red paint, sells for £2.00 per litre

200 litres of blue paint, sells for £2.00 per litre

200 litres of green paint, sells for £2.00 per litre

and it also sells:

Brown paint (half red, quarter blue, quarter green) for £4.00 a litre.

Navy blue paint (half blue, quarter red, quarter green) for £5.00 a
litre.

How can the shop maximise its income?

Now have 5 constraints

Amount of red 0.5x1 + 0.25x2 \_ 300

Amount of blue 0.25x1 + 0.5x2 \_ 200

Amount of green 0.25x1 + 0.25x2 \_ 200

Amount of brown x~1~ ≥ 0

Amount of navy blue x~2~ ≥ 0

Income is 1400 + 2x~1~ + 3x~2~

Because the function is linear, the function at any point in the allowed
region can be expressed in terms of the function value at the corners.

**we only need to look at the corners!**

![Graphical user interface Description automatically
generated](.//media/image4.png)
So optimum is at point B, where red

and blue constraints meet.

2x~1~ + x~2~ = 1200

x~1~ + 2x~2~ = 800

Maximum income I is:

$$I = 1400 + 2$$

i.e. I = £2866.66.

**References:**

1.  <https://www.forbes.com/>

2.  <https://www.vedantu.com/>

3.  <https://www-users.york.ac.uk/>
